---
REP: 147
title: A Standard interface for Aerial Vehicles
author: Tully Foote
tag: Deferred
category: Informational
date: '2016-05-16'
---

## Abstract

This REP is written to provide a common interface for aerial vehicles.
This interface is designed to promote interoperability and reusability
of core functionality between diverse aerial vehicles. By leveraging the
interfaces defined in this REP we both tools and libraries can be
designed to be reusable between different frameworks and vehicles. It is
expected that aerial vehicles can and will implement additional
interfaces in addition to these core interfaces. When choosing an
interface these should be considered the default and only change away
from them for a good reason.

These interfaces are designed to be relevant for all types of aerial
vehicles whether multi-copter, fixed-wing, hybrid, transitional or
other. Like ground robots, the core abstraction is the same for all
vehicles regardless of their method of motivation.

## Rationale

There are a lot of developers around the world using ROS on aerial
vehicles. As such there are also many different implementations which
are similiar but not exactly compatible. A short list of existing known
bridges and implementations follows:

> - astec_mav_framework[^1]
> - autopilot_bridge[^2]
> - CRATES[^3]
> - dji_sdk_dji2ros[^4]
> - dji_sdk[^5]
> - hector_quadrotor[^6]
> - mav_tools[^7]
> - mavlink2ros[^8]
> - mavros[^9]
> - roscopter[^10]
> - rospilot[^11]

Due to a lack of common interfaces the majority of the above packages
cannot be used together. By implementing common interfaces elements of
each package can be used in conjunction with elements of a different
package. This will allow much better collaboration between projects and
allow a reduction in duplicate efforts to implement the same
functionality.

There are also a lot of interfaces already well developed from other
domains which can be brought into the aerial vehicle domain. This REP
seeks to also integrate as many of those reusable interfaces as well to
provide the greatest compatibilty with those other domains.

## Other interface definitions

There are a lot of messages already defined. These messages definitions
were used to help define this set.

> - DroneKit[^12]
> - mav_msgs[^13]
> - mavlink[^14]
> - mavlink2[^15]
> - mavros_msgs[^16]
> - nav_msgs[^17]
> - trajectory_msgs[^18]

## Reference Abstractions

For this document we will use the following abstractions of the
architecture. These abstractions are used to define the interfaces,
however it is not required that a given system implement all the
interfaces. A given system may implement subsets of these interfaces.

### Control Abstractions

For controlling an aerial vehicle we will use the following terms for
the interfaces.

```mermaid
graph LR
  na[ ]
  tc[Trajectory Controller]
  ac[Attitude Controller]
  rc[Rate Controller]
  va[Vehicle Abstraction]
  na ==>|Trajectory|tc
  tc ==>|Pose|ac
  ac ==>|Rate|rc
  rc ==>|Acceleration|va

  va -.-> am[Allocation Matrix]
  va -.-> mixer

  am -.-> Actuators
  mixer -.-> Actuators
```

### High Level Architecture

A higher level view of the system uses the following abstraction.

```mermaid
graph LR
  GCS[Ground Control Station]
  CS[Collision Sensors]
  OS[Odometry Sensors]
  C[Controller]
  L[ ]
  style L fill:#fff,stroke:#ff0,stroke-width:0px;
  L --> CS
  L --> GCS
  L --> OS
  subgraph Generic Planning Framework
  CM[Collision Mapping]
  MSC[Planner e.g.<br>Minimum Snap Trajectory Generator]
  CM ---|Shared State|MSC
  end
  CS -->|Obstacle Observations|CM
  OS -->|Odometry|MSC
  OS -->|Odometry|CM
  OS -->|Odometry|C
  GCS -->|Goals|MSC
  MSC -->|Control Abstraction|C
  %% Links to L
  linkStyle 0 fill:#fff,stroke:#ff0,stroke-width:0px;
  linkStyle 1 fill:#fff,stroke:#ff0,stroke-width:0px;
  linkStyle 2 fill:#fff,stroke:#ff0,stroke-width:0px;
```

## Coordinate Frames

It is expected that users of this interface will also follow the
coordinate frame conventions layed out in REP 105[^19].

## Proposed Interfaces

### Control Interfaces

#### Trajectory Control Interface

For sending trajectories in 3D space there already exists a message used
for free space planning. This message used is
`trajectory_msgs/MultiDOFJointTrajectory`[^20] and is actively used by
planning frameworks already.

This message is not the most straight forward to parse as it has a lot
of optional fields which increases the complexity and requires
consistent labeling and filling. The complexity of the message parsing
is traded off against supporting a relatively compact representations.

- Datatype: `trajectory_msgs/MultiDOFJointTrajectory`[^21]
- Topic: `command_trajectory`

<!-- -->

```rosmsg
# The header is used to specify the coordinate frame and the reference time for the trajectory durations
Header header

# A representation of a multi-dof joint trajectory (each point is a transformation)
# Each point along the trajectory will include an array of positions/velocities/accelerations
# that has the same length as the array of joint names, and has the same order of joints as
# the joint names array.

string[] joint_names
MultiDOFJointTrajectoryPoint[] points
```

#### Pose Interface

The message to send a goal pose is `geometry_msgs/PoseStamped`[^22].
This is a very highly used standard message and contains precisely the
information needed.

- Datatype: `geometry_msgs/PoseStamped`[^23]
- Topic: `command_pose`

<!-- -->

```rosmsg
# A Pose with reference coordinate frame and timestamp
Header header
Pose pose
```

The reference position is the origin of the `base_link` as defined
in[#REP105](##NOTE###REP105)

#### Rate Interface

The message to send a velocity command is
`geometry_msgs/TwistStamped`[^24]. This is the standard way to command
ROS vehicles. The datatype is not intended to be used in an open loop
control system.

- Datatype: `geometry_msgs/TwistStamped`[^25]
- Topic: `command_velocity`

<!-- -->

```rosmsg
std_msgs/Header header
  uint32 seq
  time stamp
  string frame_id
geometry_msgs/Twist twist
  geometry_msgs/Vector3 linear
    float64 x
    float64 y
    float64 z
  geometry_msgs/Vector3 angular
    float64 x
    float64 y
    float64 z
```

The command is a body relative set of velocities in linear and angular
space. This diverges from the common `geometry_msgs/Twist`[^26] used by
some ground robots. A pure `Twist` based interface could be provided for
backwards compatibility as well. It was chosen to diverge here since
this is a much more powerful inteface for the vehicles and does not
require all commands to be reverse calculated for the instantaneous
attitude of the vehicle. Furthermore, the timestamp field allows for
improved timeout behavior due to stale command data.

This is replacing `mav_msgs/AttitudeThrust`[^27] and
`mav_msgs/RollPitchYawrateThrust`[^28].

#### Acceleration Interface

The message to send a velocity command is
`geometry_msgs/TwistStamped`[^29]. The datatype is not intended to be
used in an open loop control system.

- Datatype: `geometry_msgs/TwistStamped`[^30]
- Topic: `command_acceleration`

<!-- -->

```rosmsg
std_msgs/Header header
  uint32 seq
  time stamp
  string frame_id
geometry_msgs/Twist twist
  geometry_msgs/Vector3 linear
    float64 x
    float64 y
    float64 z
  geometry_msgs/Vector3 angular
    float64 x
    float64 y
    float64 z
```

The command is a body relative set of accelerations in linear and
angular space. The reference position is the origin of the `base_link`
as defined in[#REP105](##NOTE###REP105)

This is replacing the `mav_msgs/RateThrust`[^31] message for a more
standard one with the specific call out of the `base_link`.

### High Level Interfaces

#### Odometry Interface

To communicate odometry information the `nav_msgs/Odometry` message will
be used.[^32] This is the standard message used throughout ROS systems
already, many modules already take advantage of it. However there are
many use cases for aerial vehicles when the estimation of the
acceleration is important. So an additional message will be defined
which provides acceleration in addition to position and velocity already
defined. This additional message will be published in parallel. For
backwards compatibility all systems should publish both.

- Datatype: `nav_msgs/Odometry`[^33]
- Topic: `odom`

<!-- -->

```rosmsg
# This represents an estimate of a position and velocity in free space.
# The pose in this message should be specified in the coordinate frame given by header.frame_id.
# The twist in this message should be specified in the coordinate frame given by the child_frame_id
std_msgs/Header header
string child_frame_id
geometry_msgs/PoseWithCovariance pose
geometry_msgs/TwistWithCovariance twist
```

- Datatype: `nav_msgs/OdometryWithAcceleration`
  _\[proposed\]_
- Topic: `odometry`

<!-- -->

```rosmsg
# This represents an estimate of a position, velocity, and acceleration in free space.
# The pose in this message should be specified in the coordinate frame given by header.frame_id.
# The twist and acceleration in this message should be specified in the coordinate frame given by the child_frame_id
std_msgs/Header header
string child_frame_id
geometry_msgs/PoseWithCovariance pose
geometry_msgs/TwistWithCovariance twist
geometry_msgs/TwistWithCovariance acceleration
```

#### Goal Interface

It is expected that there will be several high level ways to communicate
goals which are application specific. A standard way to communicate
goals will also be important following the mavlink protocol we can send
the same messages over ROS using the following pair of messages.

- SubDatatype: `nav_msgs/GlobalPosition` _\[proposed\]_
- Topic: `command_gps_pose`

<!-- -->

```rosmsg
std_msgs/Header header

uint8 coordinate_frame
uint8 FRAME_GLOBAL_INT = 5
uint8 FRAME_GLOBAL_REL_ALT = 6
uint8 FRAME_GLOBAL_TERRAIN_ALT = 11

uint16 type_mask
uint16 IGNORE_LATITUDE = 1    # Position ignore flags
uint16 IGNORE_LONGITUDE = 2
uint16 IGNORE_ALTITUDE = 4
uint16 IGNORE_VX = 8  # Velocity vector ignore flags
uint16 IGNORE_VY = 16
uint16 IGNORE_VZ = 32
uint16 IGNORE_AFX = 64    # Acceleration/Force vector ignore flags
uint16 IGNORE_AFY = 128
uint16 IGNORE_AFZ = 256
uint16 FORCE = 512    # Force in af vector flag
uint16 IGNORE_YAW = 1024
uint16 IGNORE_YAW_RATE = 2048

float64 latitude
float64 longitude
float32 altitude  # in meters, AMSL or above terrain depending on coordinate_frame value
geometry_msgs/Twist velocity
geometry_msgs/Twist acceleration_or_force
float32 yaw
```

To send a series of goals a list of GlobalPositions can be used.

- Datatype: `nav_msgs/GlobalWaypoints` _\[proposed\]_
- Topic: `command_gps_pose`

<!-- -->

```rosmsg
nav_msgs/GlobalPosition[] waypoints
```

### Currently Unspecified

#### Obstacle Observations

The obstacle observations are expected to use common sensor messages.
However since there are a large variety of potential sensors, this
interface will not be defined in this REP. It is recommended to use the
common messages such as `LaserScan`, `DepthImage`, and `PointCloud2`
from `sensor_msgs` whenever possible.[^34]

#### Shared State

The shared state between the collision mapping and motion planning
controller is expected to be very specific to the implementation. As
such it is not proposed to be standardized.

#### Missions

Currently there are quite a few varieties of missions data formats that
are available. The most prominent is the mavlink mission protocol.[^35]
These missions are heavily used and often customized. A ROS equivalent
could be defined but the current mission protocol is both relatively
complicated and only provides relatively simple primitive constructs
with which to compose a mission. It is expected that mission planners
can dynamically construct lower level controls for the vehicle that can
then be executed upon by the vehicle controller. The simplest of these
mission planners would generate a target waypoint for the vehicle to fly
to and send a new one when there\'s a new position to fly to. A slightly
more complex flight mission might send a series of waypoints which the
vehicle will follow until the end. If a change in path is required the
mission planner will deliver a whole new set of waypoints for the
vehicle to follow. For more complicated missions the mission planner can
generate the lower level trajectories for controlling the vehicles path
more specifically, such as when doing an orbit or other more advanced
mission operation. There are a lot more advanced missions that can be
run with state machines and higher level logic. Until there is more
development in this area we will not propose a standardized mission
profile.

## Other Interfaces

### Battery State

Aerial vehicles should use the `sensor_msgs/BatteryState` message for
reporting their battery status.[^36] This is a recently standardized
message which is much more broadly applicable than aerial vehicles and
has already been standardized.

- Datatype: `sensor_msgs/BatteryState`[^37]
- Topic: `battery_state`

### Vehicle Status

Drones could have different configurations or types as well as define
failsafes, engine failures or hardware in the loop setup. These are the
fields proposed for this message

- Datatype: `proposed_aerial_msgs/VehicleStatus` (proposed)
- Service Name: _status_

<!-- -->

```rosmsg
uint8 HIL_STATE_OFF = 0
uint8 HIL_STATE_ON = 1

uint8 VEHICLE_TYPE_UNKNOWN = 0
uint8 VEHICLE_TYPE_ROTARY_WING = 1
uint8 VEHICLE_TYPE_FIXED_WING = 2
uint8 VEHICLE_TYPE_ROVER = 3
uint8 VEHICLE_TYPE_VTOL = 4

std_msgs/Header header

uint8 system_type     # system type
bool engine_failure   # Set to true if an engine failure is detected
bool failsafe         # true if system is in failsafe state
uint8 hil_state       # current hil state
```

### Flight Modes

Drones have quite a few flight modes. For example the PX4 Flight Modes
number between 9 and 12 for different configurations.[^38] Many of these
different modes are modifying which user inputs are used and/or how they
are interpreted. For working with ROS it is expected that the user
inputs will be modulated and received through the ROS system and that
the system will be in control the whole time including implementing
fallback and recovery behaviors. Without the need for these extra modes
we will reduce the state diagram significantly. The autopilot itself is
expected to be in Offboard control mode for most configurations using
ROS. In theory all of the states could be eliminated and the arming,
takeoff, landing, and return to land logic could be fully implemented,
but we will keep those states which are related to safety system already
implemented.

To that end the following modes for ROS flight operations are proposed.

```mermaid
graph LR
  DISARMED[Disarmed]
  ARMED[Armed]
  FLYING[Flying]
  LANDED[Landed]
  RTL[Return to Land]
  DISARMED --> |Arm| ARMED
  ARMED --> |Takeoff| FLYING
  FLYING --> |Land| LANDED
  FLYING --> | RTL<br>Lost Link | RTL
  LANDED --> |Auto Disarm| DISARMED
  RTL --> |Disarm| DISARMED
  FLYING --> |Disarm| DISARMED
  RTL --> | Auto Land | LANDED
  %% Links to DISARMED
  linkStyle 5 fill:#fff,stroke:#f00,stroke-width:3px;
  linkStyle 6 fill:#fff,stroke:#f00,stroke-width:3px;
```

Note that the red disarm transitions are potentially unsafe as they
could lead to the vehicle falling.

- Datatype: `mav_msgs/FlightMode` (proposed)

<!-- -->

```rosmsg
uint8 FLIGHT_MODE_DISARMED=0
uint8 FLIGHT_MODE_ARMED=1
uint8 FLIGHT_MODE_FLYING=2
uint8 FLIGHT_MODE_LANDED=3
uint8 FLIGHT_MODE_RTL=4

uint8 flight_mode # The flight mode indicated
```

- Datatype: `mav_msgs/SetFlightMode` (proposed)
- Service Name: _set_flight_mode_

<!-- -->

```rosmsg
mav_msgs/FlightMode goal # The desired flight mode
---
mav_msgs/FlightMode result # The resultant state after the attempted transition.
bool success # True if desired change was executed False otherwise.
```

## Mavlink Equivalents

One of the most common protocols for drones is Mavlink.[^39]

It is important that we define the minimal set which provides coverage
of general flying vehicles. This type of abstraction allows the greatest
level of reusability of components between different systems. The goal
of a standard message set is to define the things that are completely
general, and let implementers define their own specializations for their
specific systems.

As those specifications become more mature they can also be standardized
as optional extensions to the defined interface. When using ROS messages
these extensions will be discoverable and shareable to facilitate
converging implementations.

This section will provide a guide of suggested mappings of existing
Mavlink messages to existing ROS messages outside the above minimal
specification. This will be useful for users who are familiar with
Mavlink or using a system with mavlink and need to bridge between
systems.

This is a departure from Mavlink where things needed to be fully defined
in the spec or at least allocated out with negotiated message IDs so
that messages didn't collide. Also the availability of topics allows the
use of the same data structures for different purposes. For example
there doesn't need to be three IMU messages to tell the different IMUs
apart.

This list has focused on getting coverage of[^40] it has been grouped
into basic categories.

### Text Status Outputs

Code should use the ROS_CONSOLE or RCL status api to report status. This
has infrastructure for enabling and setting verbosity levels at startup
and runtime as well as changing them during runtime and has standard
messages for remotely monitoring and controlling them.

- `STATUSTEXT`

### ROS Messages in REP 147

For quick reference the following mavlink messages are considered
covered in the specification above.

#### Position reporting

There are many position reporting methods defined in Mavlink. They are
all variations on PoseWithCovarianceStamped with different relevant
frame_ids.

- `LOCAL_POSITION_NED_SYSTEM_GLOBAL_O`
- `LOCAL_POSITION_NED_COV`
- `GLOBAL_POSITION_INT_COV`
- `ATTITUDE_QUATERNION_COV`
- `GLOBAL_POSITION_INT`
- `LOCAL_POSITION_NED`
- `ATTITUDE_QUATERNION`
- `ALTITUDE`

#### Battery Status

Defined above.

- `BATTERY_STATUS`

#### Position commands

These are all covered in the hierarchy of commands in REP 147

- `POSITION_TARGET_GLOBAL_INT`
- `SET_POSITION_TARGET_GLOBAL_INT`
- `POSITION_TARGET_LOCAL_NED`
- `SET_POSITION_TARGET_LOCAL_NED`
- `ATTITUDE_TARGET`
- `SET_ATTITUDE_TARGET`
- `MANUAL_SETPOINT`

#### Generic Command

These should be behaviors that then output via the REP's hierarchy of
command topics. Each node can have logic or parameters to react
according to a behavior. It's no longer a global state of the system.

- `COMMAND_ACK`
- `COMMAND_LONG`
- `COMMAND_INT`

### Generic Sensor Info

There are a lot of existing ROS messages in the sensor_msgs package[^41]
that can be immediately reused in drones. A few examples are as follows.

- `DISTANCE_SENSOR` \-- `sensor_msgs/Range`[^42]
- `CAMERA_TRIGGER` \-- `std_srvs/Trigger`[^43]
- `OPTICAL_FLOW_RAD` \-- These could use a new message but I'd want it
  to be driven by an active user/developer. There might also be
  potential in existing vision_msgs TODO(tfoote)
- `VISION_SPEED_ESTIMATE` \-- `geometry_msgs/TwistWithCovarianceStamped`
  on a specific topic.
- `VISION_POSITION_ESTIMATE` and GLOBAL_VISION_POSITION_ESTIMATE \--
  `geometry_msgs/PoseWithCovarianceStamped` on a specific topic
  TODO(tfoote) link

### Image Transport

For transporting images and image streams it is recommended to use the
\[image_transport system\](<http://wiki.ros.org/image_transport>) from
ROS. It is capable of streaming raw as well as compressed image streams
and selecting the mode at runtime. There is a plugin system to add
support for different compressions and transports.

This would cover:

- `ENCAPSULATED_DATA`
- `DATA_TRANSMISSION_HANDSHAKE`

### Wind Information

`WIND_COV` is recommended to be represented by a
`geometry_msgs/TwistWithCovarianceStamped` on a specific topic.

### Candidates for Future Porting

#### Barometer

The absolute measurements can be captured by `sensor_msgs/FluidPressure`
TODO LINK TODO A barometer message with the relative measurements would
be a good extension.

Related mesages are:

- `RAW_PRESSURE`
- `SCALED_PRESSURE`
- `SCALED_PRESSURE2`
- `SCALED_PRESSURE3`

#### Custom High Level Summary

The message `HIGH_LATENCY` is a custom summary message for sending the
state out. It's optimized for a specific use case with specific
hardware. It can easily be directly ported, but is is recommended be
broken down into a few different messages or composed of a few different
messages forwarded over the high latency/low bandwidth link instead of
defining a new datatype.

#### Vibration Levels

This is uncaptured but is not documented well enough to define a message
and is not a primary flight concern but more of a diagnostic.

- `VIBRATION`

### GPS Messsages

For GPS messages there already exists a
\[NavSatFix\](<http://docs.ros.org/api/sensor_msgs/html/msg/NavSatFix.html>)
and a
\[NavSatStatus\](<http://docs.ros.org/melodic/api/sensor_msgs/html/msg/NavSatStatus.html>)
which are recommended for general GPS position information and status.

- `GPS_STATUS`

There are also a bunch of raw and other specific data types that are
potentially useful in Mavlink, but are moderately specific to the
localization hardware. As such they would be better ported for specific
hardware support packages and not considered fully standardized.

- `GPS_INPUT`
- `GPS_RTCM_DATA`
- `GPS2_RTK`
- `GPS_RTK`
- `GPS2_RAW`
- `GPS_INJECT_DATA`
- `GPS_GLOBAL_ORIGIN`
- `SET_GPS_GLOBAL_ORIGIN`
- `GPS_RAW_INT`

### IMU Messages

There are existing IMU messages that should be reused instead of
defining new ones.
<http://docs.ros.org/melodic/api/sensor_msgs/html/msg/Imu.html> There's
already a \[proposal
upstream\](<https://github.com/ros/common_msgs/pull/101>) for
improvements that we will plan to integrate with upper triangular
covariance used in the PX4 stack.

- `RAW_IMU`
- `HIGHRES_IMU`
- `SCALED_IMU`
- `SCALED_IMU2`
- `SCALED_IMU3`

### Custom Waypoint Logic

This is mostly encoding specific messages related to autopilot
implementation behaviors. It is recommended to be captured by a generic
waypoint communicated on a specific topic or service instead of as a
dedicated message.

- `SET_HOME_POSITION`
- `HOME_POSITION`
- `LANDING_TARGET`
- `FOLLOW_TARGET`

### Parameters

These messages can be replaced by using parameters on the nodes to set
these values.

- `MESSAGE_INTERVAL`
- `SERIAL_CONTROL`

ROS provides parameters set and get services which can replace the below
messages.

- `PARAM_SET`
- `PARAM_VALUE`
- `PARAM_REQUEST_LIST`
- `PARAM_REQUEST_READ`

### Data Logging

Logging and playback are recommended to be managed by rosbag. There are
APIs already implemented for controlling recording remotely. There are
not currently apis for downloading the data but that is likely better
done using a standard file transfer mechanism than through a runtime
behavior.

Related mavlink messages include:

- `LOG_REQUEST_END`
- `LOG_ERASE`
- `LOG_DATA`
- `LOG_REQUEST_DATA`
- `LOG_ENTRY`
- `LOG_REQUEST_LIST`
- `FILE_TRANSFER_PROTOCOL`

### Time

It is recommended to use the standard ROS time abstraction.

- `SYSTEM_TIME`

### Connectivity Checks

There are many capabilities of DDS to check for liveliness and
heartbeats built into the communication layer that can be leveraged.
Also the `bond` libraries from ROS1 have heartbeat logic.

- `PING`
- `HEARTBEAT`

It is recommended that acknowledgment of message receipt be embedded
into the communication layer using the reliable transport and callbacks
if the message does not arrive.

- `COMMAND_ACK`

### Security

ROS2 using DDS\'s security extensions can provide cryptographically
secure fine grained authentication, access control, and encryption. It
is recommended to use that toolchain for security.

- `AUTH_KEY`
- `CHANGE_OPERATOR_CONTROL`
- `CHANGE_OPERATOR_CONTROL_ACK`

### Skipped in the analysis

- `RESOURCE_REQUEST` not flight related
- `V2_EXTENSION` not clearly documented

### Debugging Outputs

These are generic data types that are defined to let the developer send
basically anything over the network. Instead of shoehorning data into
these few generic datatypes on a ROS based system, it is recommended
that the developer define their own debug messages and send them along
capturing exactly what they want with the appropriate datatypes or
structures.

- `DEBUG`
- `NAMED_VALUE_INT`
- `NAMED_VALUE_FLOAT`
- `DEBUG_VECT`
- `MEMORY_VECT`

### Messages that are not generic

#### HITL Specific Messages

These are simulation specific messages that are specific to integrating
the autopilot with simulation. The current messages are also specific to
the autopilot implementation and not generic enough to necessarily use
alternative autopilots.

- `HIL_STATE_QUATERNION`
- `HIL_OPTICAL_FLOW`
- `HIL_GPS`
- `HIL_SENSOR`
- `SIM_STATE`
- `HIL_ACTUATOR_CONTROLS`
- `HIL_RC_INPUTS_RAW`
- `HIL_CONTROLS`

#### Hardware Specific Info

These mavlink messages are coupled directly to hardware and are not
abstracted at an optimal level to be considered universal for all
vehicles.

- `POWER_STATUS`
- `TIMESYNC`
- `RADIO_STATUS`

#### Mocap Specific

These mocap systems can use generic position reports with covariance on
a specific topic instead of needing a custom datatype.

- `ATT_POSE_MOCAP`
- `VICON_POSITION_ESTIMATE`

#### Low Level Control

This is too low level for a good abstraction, it's not valid on all
types of hardware.

- `SET_ACTUATOR_CONTROL_TARGET`
- `ACTUATOR_CONTROL_TARGET`
- `MANUAL_CONTROL`
- `RC_CHANNELS_OVERRIDE` Also overriding user commands
- `RC_CHANNELS`
- `PARAM_MAP_RC`

#### Low Level Feedback

- `SERVO_OUTPUT_RAW`
- `RC_CHANNELS_RAW`
- `RC_CHANNELS_SCALED`

#### Autopilot Version information

This can be captured as a parameter.

- `AUTOPILOT_VERSION`

#### Display specific message

This is a specific message for displaying into a HUD, it's aggregating
and duplicating existing data that doesn't need to be generally
broadcast separately.

- `VFR_HUD`

#### Component specific debug Messages

This is a debug/status message that's specific to the current estimator
design. The parameters are not right for a particle filter based
estimator or another style of implementation.

- `ESTIMATOR_STATUS`

These are messages that can share the state of controllers but is only
valid for specific controllers and thus not a good candidate for
standardization.

- `CONTROL_SYSTEM_STATE`
- `NAV_CONTROLLER_OUTPUT`

#### Mission Management

The current mission definitions are a basic set of primitive behaviors.
They are a significant subset of the capabilities of vehicles and those
primitives should not be built into a next generation abstraction for
drones. However that's not to say that the mission concept should be
eliminated. Going forward the current mission structure is easy for
operators to think about and that should be retained, but instead of
considering the missions a standard interface for the drones. They
should be parsed and simply generate the REP 147 compliant trajectory
that the drone can follow. In the future this will allow the
implementation to extend the mission waypoints types and add more
complex logic into the missions and remain compatible with all drones.

- `MISSION_ITEM_INT`
- `MISSION_REQUEST_INT`
- `MISSION_ACK`
- `MISSION_ITEM_REACHED`
- `MISSION_CLEAR_ALL`
- `MISSION_COUNT`
- `MISSION_REQUEST_LIST`
- `MISSION_CURRENT`
- `MISSION_SET_CURRENT`
- `MISSION_REQUEST`
- `MISSION_ITEM`
- `MISSION_WRITE_PARTIAL_LIST`
- `MISSION_REQUEST_PARTIAL_LIST`

#### VTOL Specific State

This is a very hardware specific message that was added for a specific
hardware type. This is a good example of an extension that was required
because the standard was not abstract enough.

- `EXTENDED_SYS_STATE`

#### Collision Information

These collision messages are customized to a specific implementation and
do no generalize.

- `COLLISION`
- `ADSB_VEHICLE`
- `TERRAIN_DATA`
- `TERRAIN_CHECK`
- `TERRAIN_REPORT`
- `SAFETY_ALLOWED_AREA`
- `SAFETY_SET_ALLOWED_AREA`

## Summary

### Existing interfaces

> - Battery State via `sensor_msgs/BatteryState`[^44]
> - Trajectory via `trajectory_msgs/MultiDOFJointTrajectory`[^45]
> - Rates via `mav_msgs/RollPitchYawrateThrust`[^46] or
>   `mav_msgs/AttitudeThrust`[^47]
> - Accelerations via `mav_msgs/RateThrust`[^48]
> - Obstacle information from common `sensor_msgs`[^49]
> - Odometry via`nav_msgs/Odometry`[^50]

Proposed New Interfaces

> - Extended Odometry via proposed `nav_msgs/OdometryWithAcceleration`
>   \[propoised\]

## References

## Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

##### 

> Local Variables: mode: indented-text indent-tabs-mode: nil
> sentence-end-double-space: t fill-column: 70 coding: utf-8 End:

[^1]: astec_mav_framework (<http://wiki.ros.org/asctec_mav_framework>)

[^2]: autopilot_bridge
    (<https://github.com/mikeclement/autopilot_bridge>)

[^3]: CRATES (<https://bitbucket.org/asymingt/crates>)

[^4]: dji_sdk_dji2ros
    (<http://www.ros.org/browse/details.php?distro=indigo&name=dji_sdk_dji2mav>)

[^5]: dji_sdk (<http://wiki.ros.org/dji_sdk>)

[^6]: hector_quadrotor (<http://wiki.ros.org/hector_quadrotor>)

[^7]: mav_tools (<http://wiki.ros.org/mav_tools>)

[^8]: mavlink2ros (<https://github.com/posilva/mav2rosgenerator>)

[^9]: mavros (<http://wiki.ros.org/mavros>)

[^10]: roscopter (<https://code.google.com/p/roscopter/>)

[^11]: rospilot (<http://wiki.ros.org/rospilot>)

[^12]: DroneKit (<http://dronekit.io/>)

[^13]: mav_msgs (<http://wiki.ros.org/mav_msgs>)

[^14]: Mavlink (<https://mavlink.io/en/>)

[^15]: Mavlink2
    (<https://github.com/diydrones/mavlink/blob/mavlink2-wip/doc/MAVLink2.md>)

[^16]: mavros (<http://wiki.ros.org/mavros>)

[^17]: nav_msgs (<http://wiki.ros.org/nav_msgs>)

[^18]: trajectory_msgs (<http://wiki.ros.org/trajectory_msgs>)

[^19]: REP 105: Coordinate Frames for Mobile Platforms
    (<http://www.ros.org/reps/rep-0105.html>)

[^20]: (<http://docs.ros.org/api/trajectory_msgs/html/msg/MultiDOFJointTrajectory.html>)

[^21]: (<http://docs.ros.org/api/trajectory_msgs/html/msg/MultiDOFJointTrajectory.html>)

[^22]: (<http://docs.ros.org/api/geometry_msgs/html/msg/PoseStamped.html>)

[^23]: (<http://docs.ros.org/api/geometry_msgs/html/msg/PoseStamped.html>)

[^24]: geometry_msgs/TwistStamped
    (<http://docs.ros.org/api/geometry_msgs/html/msg/TwistStamped.html>)

[^25]: geometry_msgs/TwistStamped
    (<http://docs.ros.org/api/geometry_msgs/html/msg/TwistStamped.html>)

[^26]: geometry_msgs/Twist
    (<http://docs.ros.org/api/geometry_msgs/html/msg/Twist.html>)

[^27]: mav_msgs/AttitudeThrust
    (<http://docs.ros.org/jade/api/mav_msgs/html/msg/AttitudeThrust.html>)

[^28]: mav_msgs/RollPitchYawrateThrust
    (<http://docs.ros.org/indigo/api/mav_msgs/html/msg/RollPitchYawrateThrust.html>)

[^29]: geometry_msgs/TwistStamped
    (<http://docs.ros.org/api/geometry_msgs/html/msg/TwistStamped.html>)

[^30]: geometry_msgs/TwistStamped
    (<http://docs.ros.org/api/geometry_msgs/html/msg/TwistStamped.html>)

[^31]: mav_msgs/RateThrust
    (<http://docs.ros.org/jade/api/mav_msgs/html/msg/RateThrust.html>)

[^32]: odometry
    (<http://www.ros.org/doc/api/nav_msgs/html/msg/Odometry.html>)

[^33]: odometry
    (<http://www.ros.org/doc/api/nav_msgs/html/msg/Odometry.html>)

[^34]: (<http://wiki.ros.org/sensor_msgs>)

[^35]: Mavlink Mission protocol
    (<https://mavlink.io/en/services/mission.html>)

[^36]: sensor_msgs/BatteryState
    (<http://docs.ros.org/api/sensor_msgs/html/msg/BatteryState.html>)

[^37]: sensor_msgs/BatteryState
    (<http://docs.ros.org/api/sensor_msgs/html/msg/BatteryState.html>)

[^38]: PX4 Flight Modes
    (<https://dev.px4.io/en/concept/flight_modes.html>)

[^39]: Mavlink (<https://mavlink.io/en/>)

[^40]: Mavlink Common.xml (<https://mavlink.io/en/messages/common.html>)

[^41]: (<http://wiki.ros.org/sensor_msgs>)

[^42]: `sensor_msgs/Range`
    (<http://docs.ros.org/melodic/api/sensor_msgs/html/msg/Range.html>)

[^43]: `std_srvs/Trigger`
    (<http://docs.ros.org/melodic/api/std_srvs/html/srv/Trigger.html>)

[^44]: sensor_msgs/BatteryState
    (<http://docs.ros.org/api/sensor_msgs/html/msg/BatteryState.html>)

[^45]: (<http://docs.ros.org/api/trajectory_msgs/html/msg/MultiDOFJointTrajectory.html>)

[^46]: mav_msgs/RollPitchYawrateThrust
    (<http://docs.ros.org/indigo/api/mav_msgs/html/msg/RollPitchYawrateThrust.html>)

[^47]: mav_msgs/AttitudeThrust
    (<http://docs.ros.org/jade/api/mav_msgs/html/msg/AttitudeThrust.html>)

[^48]: mav_msgs/RateThrust
    (<http://docs.ros.org/jade/api/mav_msgs/html/msg/RateThrust.html>)

[^49]: (<http://wiki.ros.org/sensor_msgs>)

[^50]: odometry
    (<http://www.ros.org/doc/api/nav_msgs/html/msg/Odometry.html>)
